********
Examples
********

For code blocks below, the following imports will be needed::

    import astropy.units as u
    import matplotlib as mpl
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import numpy as np
    from gala.potential import scf

.. _coeff-particle:

Computing expansion coefficients from particle positions
--------------------------------------------------------

To compute expansion coefficients for a distribution of particles or discrete
samples from a density distribution, use
`~gala.potential.scf.compute_coeffs_discrete`. In this example, we will generate
particle positions from a Plummer density profile, compute the expansion
coefficients assuming spherical symmetry, then re-compute the expansion
coefficients and variances (Weinberg 1996; [W96]_) allowing for non-spherical
terms (e.g., :math:`l,m>0`).

We'll start by generating samples from a Plummer sphere (see Section 3 of
[HMV11]_ for more details). To do this, we will use inverse transform sampling
by inverting the cumulative mass function (in this case, the mass enclosed):

.. math::

    \rho(r) &= \frac{M}{\frac{4}{3}\pi a^3} \, \left(1 + \frac{r^2}{a^2}\right)^{-5/2}

    m(<r) &= \frac{M \, r^3}{(r^2 + a^2)^{3/2}}

    r(\mu) &= a \, (\mu^{-2/3} - 1)^{-1/2}

    \mu &= m(<r) / M

For simplicity, we will work with units in which :math:`a=1` and :math:`M=1`. To
generate radii, we first randomly generate values of :math:`\mu` uniformly
distributed between 0 and 1, then compute the value of :math:`r` for each
sample; the radii will then be distributed following a Plummer profile. For this
example, we'll use 16384 samples::

    def sample_r(size=1):
        mu = np.random.random(size=size)
        return 1 / np.sqrt(mu**(-2/3) - 1)

    n_samples = 16384
    r = sample_r(size=n_samples)

Let's plot the density profile derived from these samples vs. the true profile:

.. plot::
    :align: center
    :context:

    import astropy.units as u
    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import gala.potential as gp
    from gala.units import dimensionless

    pot = gp.PlummerPotential(m=1., b=1., units=dimensionless)

    def sample_r(size=1):
        mu = np.random.random(size=size)
        return 1 / np.sqrt(mu**(-2/3) - 1)

    n_samples = 16384
    r = sample_r(size=n_samples)

    bins = np.logspace(-2, 3, 128)
    bin_cen = (bins[1:] + bins[:-1]) / 2.
    H,edges = np.histogram(r, bins=bins, weights=np.zeros_like(r) + pot.parameters['m']/r.size)

    V = 4/3.*np.pi*(bins[1:]**3 - bins[:-1]**3)

    _r = np.logspace(-2, 2, 1024)
    q = np.zeros((3,_r.size))
    q[0] = _r

    fig = plt.figure(figsize=(6,4))
    plt.loglog(_r, pot.density(q), marker=None, label='True profile', color='#cccccc', lw=3)
    plt.loglog(bin_cen, H / V, marker=None, label='Particles', color='k')
    plt.legend(loc='lower left')
    plt.xlim(1E-2, 1E2)
    plt.xlabel('$r$')
    plt.ylabel(r'$\rho(r)$')
    fig.tight_layout()

With the above, we now have sampled spherical radii that follow the desired
density profile. To compute the expansion coefficients needed to represent this
density using SCF with Hernquist radial functions, we first need to convert to
3D cartesian positions. We will distribute these particles uniformly in angles::

    phi = np.random.uniform(0, 2*np.pi, size=n_samples)
    theta = np.arccos(2*np.random.random(size=n_samples) - 1)

    xyz = np.zeros((n_samples, 3))
    xyz[:,0] = r * np.cos(phi) * np.sin(theta)
    xyz[:,1] = r * np.sin(phi) * np.sin(theta)
    xyz[:,2] = r * np.cos(theta)

    plt.figure(figsize=(5,5))
    plt.plot(xyz[:,0], xyz[:,1], linestyle='none',
             marker=',', alpha=0.25, color='k')
    plt.xlim(-5, 5)
    plt.ylim(-5, 5)
    plt.xlabel('$x$')
    plt.ylabel('$y$')

.. plot::
    :align: center
    :context: close-figs

    phi = np.random.uniform(0, 2*np.pi, size=n_samples)
    theta = np.arccos(2*np.random.random(size=n_samples) - 1)

    xyz = np.zeros((n_samples, 3))
    xyz[:,0] = r * np.cos(phi) * np.sin(theta)
    xyz[:,1] = r * np.sin(phi) * np.sin(theta)
    xyz[:,2] = r * np.cos(theta)

    plt.figure(figsize=(5,5))
    plt.plot(xyz[:,0], xyz[:,1], linestyle='none',
             marker=',', alpha=0.25, color='k')
    plt.xlim(-5, 5)
    plt.ylim(-5, 5)
    plt.xlabel('$x$')
    plt.ylabel('$y$')

To compute the expansion coefficients, we then pass the positions ``xyz`` and
masses of each "particle" to `~gala.potential.scf.compute_coeffs_discrete`. We
will generate an array of masses that sum to 1, per our choice of units above.
To start, we'll assume that the particle distribution has spherical symmetry and
ignore terms with :math:`l>0`. We'll then plot the magnitude of the coefficients
as a function of :math:`n` (but we'll ignore the sine terms, :math:`T_{nlm}` for
this example)::

    mass = np.ones(n_samples) / n_samples
    S,T = scf.compute_coeffs_discrete(xyz, mass=mass, nmax=16, lmax=0, r_s=1.)

    plt.semilogy(np.abs(S[:,0,0]), marker=None, lw=2)
    plt.xlabel("$n$")
    plt.ylabel("$S_{n00}$")
    plt.tight_layout()

.. plot::
    :align: center
    :context: close-figs

    from gala.potential import scf

    mass = np.ones(n_samples) / n_samples
    S,T = scf.compute_coeffs_discrete(xyz, mass=mass, nmax=20, lmax=0, r_s=1.)

    plt.figure(figsize=(6,4))
    plt.semilogy(np.abs(S[:,0,0]), marker=None, lw=2)
    plt.xlabel("$n$")
    plt.ylabel("$S_{n00}$")
    plt.tight_layout()

In addition to computing the coefficient values, we can also compute the
variances of the coefficients. Here we will relax the assumption about spherical
symmetry by setting :math:`l_{\rm max}=4`. By computing the variance of each
coefficient, we can estimate the signal-to-noise ratio of each expansion term
and use this to help decide when to truncate the expansion (see [W96]_ for the
methodology and reasoning behind this)::

    (S,varS),(T,varT) = scf.compute_coeffs_discrete(xyz, mass=mass, r_s=1.,
                                                    nmax=10, lmax=4, skip_m=True,
                                                    compute_var=True)

    signal_to_noise = np.sqrt(S**2 / varS)

    for l in range(S.shape[1]):
        plt.semilogy(signal_to_noise[:,l,0], marker=None, lw=2,
                     alpha=0.5, label='l={}'.format(l))

    plt.axhline(1., linestyle='dashed')
    plt.xlabel("$n$")
    plt.ylabel("$S/N$")
    plt.legend()

.. plot::
    :align: center
    :context: close-figs

    (S,varS),(T,varT) = scf.compute_coeffs_discrete(xyz, mass=mass, r_s=1.,
                                                    nmax=10, lmax=4,
                                                    compute_var=True)

    signal_to_noise = np.sqrt(S**2 / varS)

    plt.figure(figsize=(6,4))
    for l in range(S.shape[1]):
        plt.semilogy(signal_to_noise[:,l,0], marker=None, lw=2,
                     alpha=0.5, label='l={}'.format(l))
    plt.axhline(1., linestyle='dashed')
    plt.xlabel("$n$")
    plt.ylabel("$S/N$")
    plt.legend()
    plt.tight_layout()

The horizontal line in the plot above is for a signal-to-noise ratio of 1 -- any
coefficients with a SNR near or below this line are suspect and likely just
adding noise to the expansion. Note that all of the SNR values for :math:`l > 0`
hover around 1 -- this is a good indication that we only need the :math:`l=0`
terms to accurately represent the density distribution of the particles.

.. _coeff-analytic:

Computing expansion coefficients for an analytic density
--------------------------------------------------------

To compute expansion coefficients for an analytic density profile, use
`~gala.potential.scf.compute_coeffs`. In this example, we will write a function
to evaluate an oblate density distribution and compute the expansion
coefficients.

We'll use a flattened Hernquist profile as our density profile:

.. math::

    \rho(s) &= \frac{M \, a}{2\pi} \, \frac{1}{s (s+a)^3}

    s^2 &= x^2 + y^2 + \frac{z^2}{q^2}

In code::

    def hernquist_density(r, M, a):
        return M*a / (2*np.pi) / (r*(r+a)**3)

    def flattened_hernquist_density(x, y, z, M, a, q):
        s = np.sqrt(x**2 + y**2 + (z/q)**2)
        return hernquist_density(s, M, a)

The function to evaluate the density must take at least 3 arguments: the
cartesian coordinates ``x``, ``y``, ``z``.

We'll again set :math:`M=a=1` and we'll use a flattening :math:`q=0.8`. Let's
visualize this by plotting isodensity contours in the :math:`x`-:math:`z` plane:

.. plot::
    :align: center
    :context: reset

    import astropy.units as u
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import matplotlib as mpl
    from matplotlib import ticker
    import numpy as np
    from gala.potential import scf

    def hernquist_density(r, M, a):
        return M*a / (2*np.pi) / (r*(r+a)**3)

    def flattened_hernquist_density(x, y, z, M, a, q):
        s = np.sqrt(x**2 + y**2 + (z/q)**2)
        return hernquist_density(s, M, a)

    M = 1.
    a = 1.
    q = 0.8

    x,z = np.meshgrid(np.linspace(-10., 10., 128),
                      np.linspace(-10., 10., 128))
    y = np.zeros_like(x)

    dens = flattened_hernquist_density(x, y, z, M, a, q)

    plt.figure(figsize=(6,6))
    plt.contourf(x, z, dens, cmap='magma',
                 levels=np.logspace(np.log10(dens.min()), np.log10(dens.max()), 32),
                 locator=ticker.LogLocator())
    plt.title("Isodensity")
    plt.xlabel("$x$", fontsize=22)
    plt.ylabel("$z$", fontsize=22)
    plt.tight_layout()

To compute the expansion coefficients, we pass the
``flattened_hernquist_density()`` function in to
`~gala.potential.scf.compute_coeffs`.  Because this is an axisymmetric density,
we will ignore terms with :math:`m>0` by setting ``skip_m=True``::

    M = 1.
    a = 1.
    q = 0.8
    coeff = scf.compute_coeffs(flattened_hernquist_density, nmax=8, lmax=8,
                                M=M, r_s=a, args=(M,a,q), skip_m=True)
    (S,Serr),(T,Terr) = coeff

Computing the coefficients involves a numerical integration that uses
`scipy.integrate.quad`, which simultaneously estimates the error in the computed
integral. `~gala.potential.scf.compute_coeffs` returns the coefficient arrays
and these error estimates.

Now that we have the coefficients in hand, we can visualize their magnitudes::

    plt.figure(figsize=(6,4))
    plt.semilogy(np.abs(S[:,0,0]), marker=None, lw=2)
    plt.xlabel("$n$")
    plt.ylabel("$S_{n00}$")

.. plot::
    :align: center
    :context: close-figs

    nmax = 8
    lmax = 8
    coeff = scf.compute_coeffs(flattened_hernquist_density, nmax=nmax, lmax=lmax,
                               M=M, r_s=a, args=(M,a,q), skip_m=True)
    (S,Serr),(T,Terr) = coeff

    plt.figure(figsize=(6,4))
    plt.semilogy(np.abs(S[:,0,0]), marker=None, lw=2)
    plt.xlabel("$n$")
    plt.ylabel("$S_{n00}$")
    plt.tight_layout()

Because we ignored any :math:`m` terms, the coefficients are computed in a 2D
grid in :math:`n,l`: we can visualize their magnitude by coloring points on such
a grid::

    nl_grid = np.mgrid[0:lmax+1, 0:nmax+1]

    plt.figure(figsize=(5,4))
    plt.scatter(nl_grid[0].ravel(), nl_grid[1].ravel(),
                c=np.abs(S[:,:,0].ravel()), norm=mpl.colors.LogNorm(),
                cmap='viridis', s=80)
    plt.xlabel('$n$')
    plt.ylabel('$l$')
    plt.colorbar()

.. plot::
    :align: center
    :context: close-figs

    nl_grid = np.mgrid[0:lmax+1, 0:nmax+1]

    plt.figure(figsize=(5,4))
    plt.scatter(nl_grid[0].ravel(), nl_grid[1].ravel(),
                c=np.abs(S[:,:,0].ravel()), norm=mpl.colors.LogNorm(),
                cmap='viridis', s=80)
    plt.xlabel('$n$')
    plt.ylabel('$l$')
    plt.colorbar()
    plt.tight_layout()

.. _potential-class:

Using `~gala.potential.scf.SCFPotential` to evaluate the density, potential, gradient
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In this example we'll continue where the :ref:`previous example
<coeff-analytic>` left off: we now have computed expansion coefficients for a
given density function and we would like to evaluate the gradient of the
gravitational potential at various locations. We will use `gala` to integrate
an orbit in the expansion potential.

From the previous example, we have a set of cosine and sine coefficients (``S``
and ``T``) for an SCF representation of a flattened (oblate) Hernquist density
profile. First, we'll create an `~gala.potential.scf.SCFPotential` object using
these coefficients::

    potential = scf.SCFPotential(Snlm=S, Tnlm=T, m=M, r_s=a) # M=a=1

Let's compare how our expansion density to the true density by
recreating the above isodensity contour figure with SCF density contours
overlaid::

    x,z = np.meshgrid(np.linspace(-10., 10., 128),
                      np.linspace(-10., 10., 128))
    y = np.zeros_like(x)
    true_dens = flattened_hernquist_density(x, y, z, M, a, q)

    # we need an array of positions with shape (3,n_samples) for SCFPotential
    xyz = np.vstack((x.ravel(),y.ravel(),z.ravel()))
    scf_dens = potential.density(xyz)

    # log-spaced contour levels
    levels = np.logspace(np.log10(true_dens.min()), np.log10(true_dens.max()), 16)

    plt.figure(figsize=(6,6))

    plt.contourf(x, z, true_dens, cmap='magma',
                 levels=levels, locator=ticker.LogLocator())
    plt.contour(x, z, scf_dens.reshape(x.shape), colors='w',
                levels=levels, locator=ticker.LogLocator())

    plt.title("Isodensity")
    plt.xlabel("$x$", fontsize=22)
    plt.ylabel("$z$", fontsize=22)

.. plot::
    :align: center
    :context: close-figs

    potential = scf.SCFPotential(Snlm=S, Tnlm=T, m=M, r_s=a) # M=a=1

    # we need an array of positions with shape (3,n_samples) for SCFPotential
    xyz = np.vstack((x.ravel(),y.ravel(),z.ravel()))
    scf_dens = potential.density(xyz)

    # log-spaced contour levels
    true_dens = flattened_hernquist_density(x, y, z, M, a, q)
    levels = np.logspace(np.log10(true_dens.min()), np.log10(true_dens.max()), 16)

    plt.figure(figsize=(6,6))

    plt.contourf(x, z, true_dens, cmap='magma',
                 levels=levels, locator=ticker.LogLocator())
    plt.contour(x, z, scf_dens.reshape(x.shape), colors='w',
                levels=levels, locator=ticker.LogLocator())

    plt.title("Isodensity")
    plt.xlabel("$x$", fontsize=22)
    plt.ylabel("$z$", fontsize=22)
    plt.tight_layout()

By eye, the SCF representation looks pretty good. Let's now create a plot of
equipotential contours using the `~gala.potential.scf.SCFPotential` instance::

    scf_pot = np.abs(potential.energy(xyz))
    scf_pot = scf_pot.value # get numerical value from `~astropy.units.Quantity`

    # log-spaced contour levels
    levels = np.logspace(np.log10(scf_pot.min()), np.log10(scf_pot.max()), 16)

    plt.figure(figsize=(6,6))

    plt.contour(x, z, scf_pot.reshape(x.shape), cmap='inferno_r',
                levels=levels, locator=ticker.LogLocator())

    plt.title("Equipotential")
    plt.xlabel("$x$", fontsize=22)
    plt.ylabel("$z$", fontsize=22)

.. plot::
    :align: center
    :context: close-figs

    scf_pot = np.abs(potential.energy(xyz))
    scf_pot = scf_pot.value # get numerical value from Astropy Quantity

    # log-spaced contour levels
    levels = np.logspace(np.log10(scf_pot.min()), np.log10(scf_pot.max()), 16)

    plt.figure(figsize=(6,6))

    plt.contour(x, z, scf_pot.reshape(x.shape), cmap='inferno_r',
                levels=levels, locator=ticker.LogLocator())

    plt.title("Equipotential")
    plt.xlabel("$x$", fontsize=22)
    plt.ylabel("$z$", fontsize=22)
    plt.tight_layout()

(the above is actually provided as a convenience method of any
`~gala.potential.PotentialBase` subclass -- see
`~gala.potential.PotentialBase.plot_contours`).

Now let's integrate an orbit in this potential. We'll use the orbit integration
framework from `gala.integrate` and the convenience method
`~gala.potential.scf.SCFPotential.integrate_orbit` to do this::

    import gala.dynamics as gd

    # when using dimensionless units, we don't need to specify units for the
    # initial conditions
    w0 = gd.PhaseSpacePosition(pos=[1.,0,0.25],
                               vel=[0.,0.3,0.])

    # by default this uses Leapfrog integration
    orbit = potential.integrate_orbit(w0, dt=0.1, n_steps=10000)

    fig = orbit_l.plot(marker=',', linestyle='none', alpha=0.5)

.. plot::
    :align: center
    :context: close-figs

    import gala.dynamics as gd

    # when using dimensionless units, we don't need to specify units for the
    # initial conditions
    w0 = gd.PhaseSpacePosition(pos=[1.,0,0.25],
                               vel=[0.,0.3,0.])

    # by default this uses Leapfrog integration
    orbit = potential.integrate_orbit(w0, dt=0.1, n_steps=10000)

    fig = orbit.plot(marker=',', linestyle='none', alpha=0.5)

References
----------
.. [W96] http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/177902
.. [HMV11] http://www.artcompsci.org/kali/vol/plummer/volume11.pdf
